The Voice of the Stars: the testament of the Zodiac unveiled
Introduction
In part four of this new investigation in thirteen parts we continue our work of attempting to reconcile Astrology with its lost sibling — Astronomy — to restore something of the Wisdom they embodied when they were one, unified Science. If you have not read the first three parts or our afterwords to them, please do so before continuing, otherwise you will not obtain a complete understanding of the many subjects under discussion. In this fourth instalment we carry on with our study of the twelve Zodiacal constellations together with their corresponding Sun-signs, while in the accompanying afterword we continue our journey through the extra-Zodiacal constellations. Before we do so, we would like to say something about the methods the ancient Egyptians employed for depicting and elucidating the Testament of the Zodiac. For, as we have pointed out from the very beginning of this investigation, it is to Egypt that we owe the origins of the sciences of astronomy and astrology.

star chart
Anon. — Egyptian star-chart — Tomb of Senenmut, 18th Dynasty.

Gerald Massey in his monumental work Ancient Egypt: The Light of the World writes: "Egypt was not indebted to any foreign region for her original scheme of constellations." In his chapter on 'The Sign Language of Astronomical Mythology' he shows that sign language — that is to say the use of pictograms — was the earliest form of communicating knowledge. We made the selfsame point in our investigation of the Mystery Language in which we said: "The earliest means of communicating ideas was through pictures." Massey goes on to explain that: "The types of this Sign-language had been founded in totemism." This requires a brief explanation for modern readers. By totemism Massey did not mean superstitions derived from idol worship, but the belief that Man and Kosmos are inextricably connected in a mystical relationship in which the macrocosm is reflected in the microcosm or Universal Nature in Man, and Man in Universal Nature. This idea was later enshrined in the Hermetic Law of Correspondence which is preserved in the maxim "as above, so below." For example, motherhood is a universal principle throughout the manifested Kosmos. Galaxies and stars are born from the matrix of Space in an analogous manner to human children. Hence, totemism was first employed in distinguishing the human father and mother from the Father and Mother of All. The stars so conveniently placed above our heads in a wondrous tapestry all could see provided the means to do so. Firstly in their formation into constellations — each depicting one or more ideas — and later grouped into ten or twelve Zodiacal Signs. In this way the elemental powers of light and darkness, fire and water, air and earth, moisture and dryness were recorded in the Heavens to be read by the aid of the Egyptian Wisdom Teachings imparted during the Mysteries. The primitive constellations might be described as Egyptian ideographs configured in groups of stars, with the view of not only determining time and season, but of registering the past, present and future of all things and beings. It was in this way, over a period of uncountable millennia, that the Testament of the Zodiac was formulated, developed and perfected.

This principle is similar to that employed to this day by teachers who draw diagrams and pictures upon the blackboard to communicate certain ideas, facts or information to their students. The writer has very fond memories of a history teacher and talented artist who used just this method to bring ancient Rome to vivid life for his spellbound audience of young children in ways no textbook ever could. In the same way the Sages of ancient Egypt approximately shaped the constellation figures on the background of the Heavens, to be seen at night and expounded in the Sacred Mysteries. For example, if they wished to elucidate the eternal war between the two minds they might employ the conflict between Corvus the Crow and Hydra the Water Serpent which we discussed with you in our Afterword to part two of this investigation. If they wished to describe the derivation and descent of human souls they might refer to Seven Great Spirits configured as the seven pole stars, as we told you about in our Proem to part three. It was the Egyptian Sages who first conceived the idea of depicting the Mysteries astronomically. These Mysteries, as we explained in the Afterword to our article about the Elixir of Life, were a dramatic mode of communicating the secrets of Occult Science in sign-language through the medium of astronomical mythology. It is for this reason, as well as others, that the astronomers of Egypt were known and revered by the Greek philosophers who sought out their wisdom, by the title of "mystery teachers of the heavens."

Proem: Sirius, the brightest star in the night sky
The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth his handywork. Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night sheweth knowledge.
Psalms 19:1-2

Sirius, designated by astronomers as Alpha Canis Majoris, is the brightest star in the night sky. It is a binary star consisting of Sirius A and a white dwarf companion. The name comes to us from the Ancient Greek Seirios, via Latin Sirius, meaning 'glowing' or 'scorching'. The name may also be related to the Arabic Siraj meaning 'the glittering one'. Sirius is colloquially known as the "Dog Star", reflecting its prominence in the constellation of the Greater Dog (Canis Major). Once every year Sirius becomes visible above the eastern horizon at dawn just before Sunrise. This phenomenon is termed the heliacal rising of a star or planet. We shall come back to this important point later. At the present time the colour of Sirius is white, with a tinge of blue, but historical records show that this colour has not always prevailed. The Greek poet Aratus, who flourished in the third century B.C., said it was "many-coloured." The second century astrologer Claudius Ptolemy classified it with Aldebaran, Antares, and Betelgeuse, as fiery red; the Roman philosopher Seneca said it was redder than Mars, while in the 10th century, the Arabian astronomer al-Biruni termed it 'shining-red'. Sirius has shown a white colour for the last 1000 to 1200 years. It is believed to be enormously hot, and 30 times as bright as our sun. We think that the colour changes could be due to either its surrounding planets or its companion mentioned earlier, a small White Dwarf star called Sirius B first discovered in 1862 and affectionately dubbed 'the Pup', intervening between itself and our point of view from the earth.

sepdet
Anon. — Isis-Sepdet — the personification of Sirius — gouache on board. 1986.

Sirius had great importance in Egypt where it was known as Sepdet, also transliterated Sepdit, Sopdit and Sept, which the Greeks rendered as Sothis. It was sacred at all times to the Goddess Isis in her character as the mother of Horus, the saviour who came to make war on the dragon and to bruise the serpent's head. This was prefigured in the night sky by the constellations of Hercules (Greek Heracles) and Draco. Close by to the Dragon we also see Boötes, the Herdsman, which we shall discuss in part seven, and below Hercules we find Ophiuchus, the serpent-bearer, directly opposite to Orion, the archetype of the celestial hero. Could there be a clearer or more vivid series of allegorical pictures for the eternal war between the Higher and lower minds, personified by Horus and Set respectively in the Egyptian Mythos?

Sirius marked the place in the Heavens where the souls of the righteous were symbolically freed from further servitude on Earth. It was said of those who were born again in light: "the morning star leadeth him to paradise, where he seateth himself upon his throne." The celestial drama was mirrored on Earth where Sirius was the star of the inundation which heralded the Egyptian New Year. It was also known as the herald of the annunciation and "the guide in heaven that shineth from afar." In the Pyramid Texts the Osirified deceased is identified as "the child of the star Sepdet, he revolves like Orion and Sepdet, and he rises in his place like a star." Madame Blavatsky writing in The Secret Doctrine tells us that Sirius was "the star of Mercury or Budha [meaning Wisdom], called the great instructor of mankind..." The goddess Isis was also closely associated with Sirius and in this guise is known as Ast-Sepdet, meaning Isis-Sirius, and is depicted with a star over her head as shown in the illustration above. In the Book of the Dead the goddess is made to exclaim: "I am she who rises in the constellation of the Dog-star. Rejoice, O Egypt!" The constellation associated with Sirius in Egypt was that of the Bennu bird or phoenix. It is believed to have corresponded wholly or partly to the constellations Cygnus and the Eagle (Aquila); the Egyptian phoenix being the swan of the Greeks, the peacock of the Hindus, and the eagle of the Romans. The Zend Avesta of Persia contains many hymns to Sirius in which it is called Tistrya. In Vedic astrology Sirius is called Tisya, meaning the Archer.

We said we would come back to the heliacal rising of Sirius later. This annual phenomenon marked the flooding of the Nile in ancient Egypt and the "dog days" of summer for the ancient Greeks. The displacement of Sirius 40° from the ecliptic causes its heliacal rising to be remarkably regular compared to other stars, with a period of almost exactly 365.25 days. This is only a fraction longer than the length of the solar or tropical year of 365.242 days. As a result, Sirius was the preeminent time-keeper or time marker, not only of ancient Egypt but of the entire ancient Mediterranean world. Sirius also had a profound metaphysical significance in Egypt, and was identified with several important gods and goddesses, each of whom represented one or more aspects of the Wisdom Religion, namely:

Osiris as the embodiment of the resurrection and immortality of the soul.
Isis as the emblem of birth, death and renewal in both Man and nature.
Horus as the power of the all-conquering Sun and avenger of evil.
Up-Uatu (later Anpu or Anubis) as guide of the deceased in the Afterlife.
Thoth as the God of Wisdom and Master of the material and spiritual sciences.
Sirius is mentioned repeatedly in the Book of the Dead as both the source and destination of the souls of the Elect. But this does not mean that the Egyptians were such naïve simpletons as to believe that the living literally emerged from Sirius and returned to it after death. Let us leave such fantasies where they belong — among the misguided mystics investigated by Bombast and Flitterflop in their Astral Conversations. Not that this prevented several leading members of the Theosophical Society from formulating and promoting similar fantasies in the early 20th century. Foremost among them was Charles Webster Leadbeater whom we have mentioned in several of our articles. This self-styled 'bishop' was firmly convinced that he had lived on Sirius. We think that Uranus is a far more plausible home for him. This has a double meaning that will not be lost on some of our readers! To some extent we blame Madame Blavatsky for these fantastical aberrations, for it was she who first made known some of the esoteric astronomical lore of the Egyptian Sages we are discussing in this investigation. This was only partially understood by her followers, as we're sure our words will only be partially understood by many readers. People interpret such revelations according to their occult knowledge which in most cases is both limited and incomplete. This is not to say that Sirius, as well as other stars in the firmament, do not shroud many a profound occult mystery in connection with the origins and destiny of mankind; it undoubtedly does. We have alluded to this in previous parts of this investigation. But that is all we can do, for there are many things we do not know about these profound mysteries, and we have no wish to join the ranks of those speculators who, following in the muddy footsteps of Leadbeater and his ilk, lead so many people away from truth into the byways and cul-de-sacs of unwisdom and nescience.

We said earlier that Sirius was the time-keeper of the ancient world. It rises with the Sun at Cairo on 10 July in our (Gregorian) calendar which equates to 19 July in the old Julian calendar still in use by the Russian and Greek Orthodox Churches. For this reason the Greeks associated Sirius with hot and sultry weather, and Hesiod tells us that "Sirius parches head and knees." The pestilences which prevailed in olden times during hot weather known as the 'dog-days' gave Sirius a very evil reputation. This begs the question of whether Sirius has a good or an evil influence upon the Earth and mankind. We incline to the view that its influence is of a mixed nature. Ptolemy, in his Tetrabiblos says that Sirius partakes of the qualities of Jupiter and Mars. This doesn't help us very much since every competent astrologer knows that the planets exert a dual influence — good and evil. While Mars (which was wrongly believed to be the ruler of Scorpio until recent times), is still regarded as the "Lesser Malefic" (Saturn being the greater), Jupiter is called the "Greater Benefic". But we should not forget that Zeus, whose less than savoury exploits we mentioned in the Afterword to the previous part of this investigation, was the Greek counterpart of the Roman Jupiter! To put it another way, lower evolved persons born under the influence of any planet show forth its negative side, whilst the evolved ones show forth its positive side, and so it must be with Sirius too.

gemini
GEMINI, the Heavenly Twins: the Messenger
The Arabs called the constellation of Gemini Al Tauman, meaning the twins. Among the Hebrews it was known as Thaumim, the united or twined. The Babylonians called it the Great Twins, and was represented by the mythic heroes Gilgamesh and Enkidu whose exploits were recorded in the Akkadian Epic of Gilgamesh. Their counterparts in ancient Greece were Apollo and Heracles. Apollo, the sun god, was the patron of music, healing and prophecy, while Heracles was known to the Romans as Hercules. We shall discuss the twelve labours of this famous hero when we come to consider the constellation and Zodiacal Sign of Scorpio. The Romans named the Heavenly Twins Castor and Pollux, and it is by these names that we know them today. In old star maps Castor is depicted carrying a lyre and arrow, while Pollux grasps what appears to be a club in his right hand. These objects tell us much about the nature and relationship of the twins as we shall see.

The Zodiac of Denderah depicts a male figure leading a female by the hand. Their position, just below and to the right of the constellation of the Tortoise (modern Cancer), preceding Leo (pictured standing on a sled) and following behind the bull of Taurus, leaves no doubt that they represent the twins of Gemini as shown below in a detail from the Egyptian planisphere. The ancient Copts, who were the successors of what was left of the indigenous population of Egypt after the Muslim conquest, called the constellation Pi-Mahi, meaning the united as brothers.

twins
The two main stars of Gemini, Castor and Pollux were regarded as twins from remote antiquity. Virgil tells us: "Castor and Pollux first in martial force, One bold on foot, and one renowned for horse." The roman poet Martial said: "Castor alert to tame the foaming steed and Pollux strong to deal the manly deed." The twin above and to the right (as seen from the Northern Hemisphere) is Castor, whose brightest star is Alpha Geminorum which represents Castor's head. The twin below and to the left is Pollux, whose brightest star is Beta Geminorum, representing his head. Other named stars in the constellation are Alhena, meaning wounded, hurt or afflicted in Arabic. This is located on the left foot of Castor. The star Dirah, meaning the abused or broken one in Arabic, marks the right foot of Pollux. Let us examine these features more carefully. We said earlier that in old star maps Pollux is shown holding what appears to be a club in his right hand. Some scholars have suggested that it was originally a palm branch — an emblem of peace and reconciliation, not warfare and antagonism. Is it possible that both figurations are correct, and if so, what does this signify? Castor is typically depicted carrying a bow and arrow in his outstretched left hand while cradling a lyre in the crook of his right arm. The bow and arrow suggests he is armed for conflict, a pose which is at odds with the lyre which symbolised harmony, moderation and wisdom in ancient Greece. We further see that Pollux has his left arm around Castor.

We have emphasised the words 'left' and 'right' deliberately. The position and qualities of the stars which form the bodies of the Twins together with their attitude and the objects we have enumerated, paint a vivid and accurate picture of the lower and higher selves or minds. The left arm, shoulder, foot and hand, as we have pointed out in many articles, have always been esoterically associated with negative conditions and beings, whereas the right arm, shoulder, foot and hand, have been associated with positive forces and beings. Force, we would add in passing, is Spirit in motion which by virtue of its positive nature, forms and moulds negative material conditions. It follows from this that Castor represents the mortal, human personality and Pollux the immortal Individuality we call the Higher Mind. Once we recognise this, the esoteric meaning of this constellation and its vital place in the Testament of the Zodiac becomes clear. This is the reason why in this part of our investigation we have examined the individual stars of Gemini in such detail. All this tells us that the Twins are not in dire antagonism. They are neither at war nor preparing for war. They are at peace; brothers literally 'in arms' after the great victory has been won. The victory of good over evil, light over darkness and wisdom over folly. Now we see why the wise Egyptians depicted Pollux leading Castor by the hand in their figuration of the Heavens. We see too why the club and the palm branch are interchangeable emblems that describe the cyclic phases of the elemental war between the two minds. At one time, the lower mind is in the ascendant; at others, the higher, until the final battle, after which, as we discussed in our article on Inner Peace, one or other is the victor and wins its appropriate reward.

It is interesting in this connection that the star in the right knee of Castor is called Mebsuta, which means treading under foot. John Temple alludes to this in the fifth of his articles on the Search for Truth in which he quotes from the Bible. "Dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder in the path, that biteth the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward" (Genesis 49:17). He goes on to explain that this refers in a hidden manner to the lower self which may well be said to 'bite' us in the form of our animal desires and passions, so that perchance we, or rather our Higher Mind (the 'rider' of the senses of our body) falls backward in its evolution. How all these things link up! You may remember that in the previous part of this investigation we said that: "There is hardly a single narrative, myth, event, or statement in the Bible the hidden meaning of which does not have an astronomical basis, or which is not prefigured in some way in the Testament of the Zodiac." All this shows us that the constellation of Gemini which closes the First Division of the Zodiac — that of Foundation — is the culmination of the process that began with Aries; the construction of the Temple of Man, himself a reflection of the Heavenly Man or Grand Tapestry of the Zodiac.

We have now seen that the battle between the two minds was depicted in the Heavens long before humanity appeared on Earth. It is first seen in Gemini, the last figure of the First Division, in which the Heavenly Twins struggle for mastery. Nowhere is this battle better illustrated than in The Secret Doctrine: "Endowed with divine powers, and feeling in himself his inner God, each felt he was a Man-God in his nature, though an animal in his physical Self. The struggle between the two began from the very day they tasted of the fruit of the Tree of Wisdom; a struggle for life between the spiritual and the psychic, the psychic and the physical. Those who conquered the lower principles by obtaining mastery over the body, joined the 'Sons of Light.' Those who fell victims to their lower natures, became the slaves of Matter" (The Secret Doctrine, Vol. II, p272). We shall have more to say about the struggle between the lower and Higher Mind when we come to discuss the constellations of Libra and Scorpio. Having considered the constellation of Gemini in some depth it is time to turn our attention to the Zodiacal Sign of that name to see what more we can discover about the hidden meaning of both.

The ruler of Gemini is Mercury which in Greek mythology was said to be the servant of Jupiter and the messenger of the Gods, whose function it was to reveal the mind of Deity to Man. This, as we have seen throughout this investigation, is directly copied from the Wisdom Teachings of Egypt in which Thoth or Hermes was that Messenger. Not only was the God Thoth the revealer of the Divine Mind, but the reconciler who put an end to the elemental war between Horus and Set. That is to say, the strife between the Higher and lower minds. The lyre that Castor bears in his arms may be regarded as an emblem of the gift of harmony which Thoth brings to the Twins. Thoth is called Hetep in chapter CX of the Egyptian Book of the Dead in which we may read: "He [Hetep] maketh the Two Fighters [Horus and Set] to be at peace with each other. He hath reconciled the Two Fighters with him that belongeth to them. He hath cut off the hairy scalp of the Two Fighters." Hetep means 'peace' by the way, a more fitting word to describe the reconciliation between the two minds it would be hard to find.

So far as we are aware no one has ever explained what is concealed in these words from the Book of the Dead. Gerald Massey, not being an occultist, failed to recognise that Horus and Set were mythological representations of the two minds. Indeed, there is no indication in his books that Massey was aware we have two minds. The words "him that belongeth to them" can only refer to the Divine Soul which truly belongs to both minds and watches over them at all times. Some might suggest that it is the physical body which is meant here, for it too 'belongeth' to the two minds since both share it. However, we think the Soul is meant for the Higher Mind is that part of the Soul which descends into matter for the purposes of evolution; its connection with the body is a purely temporary and brief one. The next words are completely inexplicable unless we know, or have been taught, the science of occult symbolism. Taken literally, they are apt to be construed as an opaque reference to some kind of bloodthirsty initiation ritual or weird superstition! What they really mean is that Ani, standing for the liberated Higher Self of the deceased, has left behind the bestial instincts inherent in both minds, for a Higher Mind that gives way to the beast of the lower self becomes a beast too in the end, or assumes all the bestial qualities of an animal, forsaking its divine birthright.

This is the fundamental esoteric meaning of the Zodiacal Sign of Gemini. The mission of the evolved type is to reveal the Divine Mind to Man. Which is why many astrologers (but by no means all) say that Gemini is the sign of the Writer, Artist and Inventor. All three are Messengers though this is no guarantee that their message will be either wholesome or acceptable to all men. We referred to this in our article about Art and Artists in which we said: "the artist is a magician whose art exerts a good or evil influence over us." This is true of all artists whether they be painters, musicians, writers or teachers. Their mission is self-expression. But just as there are two selves, so too may the Geminian express the virtues and qualities of the Higher or the vices and shortcomings of the lower.

Isabelle M. Pagan, whose inspired analysis of the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac we have referred to many times in this investigation, said that the chief characteristic of the evolved Geminian is "an exuberance of intellectual energy, which must find expression, and prefers to express itself, if possible, in a variety of ways." Coupled with the desire for diversity and impatience with plodding conventionality leads the evolved sons and daughters of Mercury to brilliant achievements in science and the arts. The best specimens of this Zodiacal Sign find their deepest joy and keenest satisfaction when they are fully expressing their innate gifts, whatever they may be. Theirs is the role of the Messenger, whose function it is to make life more vivid, fulfilling and beautiful for themselves and others; to stimulate, refresh and revive their fellow men by force both of exhortation and of example, inducing those whose spirits are flagging and who are in danger of sinking into dejection or apathy to rouse themselves to fresh effort. A keen desire for intellectual satisfaction is the driving force of the evolved Geminian. When this is added to genuine religious feeling, this type of advanced individual may suffer greatly when persons, or their environment and circumstances conspire to restrict or inhibit their need for self-expression.

egyptian astronomy
Routine and drudgery are torture to the refined Geminian with a mission. There is always a strong effort after achievement of some kind and the exaltation accompanying it is not infrequently followed by a keen and critical examination of the work achieved. If the verdict is unsatisfactory the individual will probably abandon that line of endeavour for a time and pursue another tack. Later they will very likely resume the abandoned task as suddenly as they dropped it, and carry it through brilliantly to a successful conclusion. These quick changes, which are especially noticeable in childhood and early youth in all Geminians, are often a source of perplexity and dismay to the parents and guardians responsible for their upbringing. But the developed Geminian knows his or her own abilities and talents best, and should be left free to follow their apparently erratic course and not be tied too closely to drudgery or routine of any kind.

Whereas the evolved Geminian discussed so far shows forth the highest and best qualities of the planet Mercury and the Zodiacal Sign, the primitive type exhibits all the worst vices of both. The thievish propensities of the lowly evolved Mercurian are all too evident. This type will take from anyone; not merely accepting but exacting as his due, sympathy, attention, consideration, admiration, time, energy and pecuniary assistance; in fact, anything and everything that will feed their egotism or further their aims. The craving for joy and variety which, in the evolved Geminian acts as a splendid spur to achievement is replaced by restlessness and perpetual dissatisfaction in the primitive members of the tribe. A constant demand for entertainment, novelty and excitement results in a tendency to shirk uncongenial tasks, leaving them as much as possible for some other poor wretch to deal with! In these two extremes; the one fully developed and the other undeveloped, we see the great lesson this Sign of the Zodiac has to teach those born under, or influenced by it. That lesson is the immense joy attendant in making life more vivid, fulfilling and beautiful for all. The opposite of this is deriving joy from making life more dull, ugly and miserable for all. The primitive Geminian is firmly convinced that however unreliable, talentless and incompetent he may be, he is meant for better and 'higher' things. Repetitive, mundane work of any kind is resented as an affliction to be fiercely avoided. Such types are bad listeners who resent the suggestions of others, however practical and sensible they may be. They are also very prone to rapid and complete changes in their views and opinions, and are generally utterly incapable of realising either that they have changed, or that it is possible for other people to hold different convictions and opinions from theirs. Alexander Boris de Pfeffel Johnson, one time British Prime Minister, journalist, complete idler, serial philanderer and professional buffoon is a prime example of this type!

asterisks
In the next part of this investigation we shall discuss the constellation of Cancer and its significance as the foremost sign of the Second Division of the Zodiac — that of Resurrection. In our concomitant Afterword the extra-Zodiacal constellations Argo Navis or the Ship, and Eridanus will come under our lens.
