Constellations
Part four: Canis Major and Canis Minor, Auriga, and Monoceros.
In the thirteen afterwords accompanying this investigation we are exploring some of the extra-zodiacal constellations and groups of stars. That is to say those which lie outside the narrow band of the ecliptic as discussed in part one of our investigation.

In part one we told you about the Perseus Family. In part two we looked at the fascinating trinity of constellations known as Hydra, Corvus and Crater. And in part three we discussed Ursa Minor and Major, and Draco, the Dragon. If you have not read the previous afterwords now is the time to do so or you will not obtain a complete understanding of the subjects under discussion.

In this fourth afterword we shall explore the Greater and Lesser Dogs, otherwise known as Canis Major and Canis Minor, Auriga, the Charioteer and the faint constellation Monoceros, also known as the Unicorn.

Canis Major has been considered from the earliest times as one of the hunting dogs of Orion, a major extra-Zodiacal constellation which we will explore fully in part six of this investigation when we discuss the Zodiacal Sign of Leo. In the Zodiac of Dendera he is figured as a hawk, the natural enemy of serpents. In ancient India it was called "the Deerslayer." In the Persian planisphere it is pictured as a wolf, and is called Zeeb. These three associations from three different places confirm that Canis Major was universally regarded as a hunting dog. What it hunted and why we shall discover in part six.

On star maps, the Greater Dog is generally pictured as standing on his hind legs watching or springing after the constellation of Lepus the Hare, which cowers close under Orion's feet, as you can see in the illustration shown below. The symbolism of this will also be explored in part six when we come to discuss the Royal constellation of the Lion and the Zodiacal sign connected with it.

canis major
The other hunting dog of Orion is Canis Minor. Some sources think that the Egyptians invented this constellation, as it always rises a little before Sirius. The heliacal rising of the Dog Star, as we discussed in our main narrative, was much dreaded by the ancient Greeks who consequently regarded the Lesser Dog as a faithful sentinel, giving warning of the approach of the baleful Sirius.

We are inclined to view this the other way around and see in Canis Minor, the well-trained watchdog who looks out for his master, Orion the Hunter. As such we might regard the Lesser Dog as representing the watchful eye of the Divine Soul which never sleeps and seeks at all times to warn the Higher Mind of danger.

Many people receive such warnings in times of danger; quite unaware of their source. If they are remotely religious they may attribute the warning to God or His angels. It is always wise to act upon such messages. Those who do, such as the subject of John Temple's first article in his investigation of the Search for Truth, profit from them and may save themselves much trouble and unnecessary suffering.

The Egyptian name for the Lesser Dog was Sebak, meaning all-conquering and victorious. In the Zodiac of Dendera it is represented as a human figure with a hawk's head and the appendage of a tail; symbolism perfectly appropriate for this fierce guardian of Orion.

Within the body of the Lesser Dog we find Procyon, as we can see in the illustration shown below. The Babylonians called this star "the Sceptre of Bel." Bel was the later form of Marduk, meaning 'Lord', an apt title for Orion the Celestial Hunter and Warrior who was known in Egypt as Amsu or Min, a very ancient God who was associated with Horus as the Avenger of his father Osiris.

canis minor
It is interesting that Procyon, like Sirius, is a binary star system consisting of a white main-sequence star in orbit with a faint white dwarf companion. Procyon becomes the eighth-brightest star in the night sky when it culminates at midnight in mid January in the Northern Hemisphere. The name comes to us from the Ancient Greek Prokyon, meaning "before the dog", since it precedes the "Dog Star" or Sirius as it travels across the starry firmament.

The next extra-Zodiacal constellation to come under ours lens is Auriga, Latin for the Charioteer. In the previous part of this investigation we said that it was "remarkable that, with one foot on the horns of Taurus — the 'foundation stone' — stands the Constellation Auriga, the Charioteer, also called 'The Shepherd'. In the same way does the Divine Soul 'rest' upon the body and lower mind by means of the Higher Mind, the latter being the intermediary between Heaven and Earth as it were."

The star which marks this pivotal point in the Testament of the Zodiac was originally designated Gamma Aurigae but is now named Beta Tauri, or more commonly Elnath. It is shared equally between the constellations of Taurus and Auriga, marking the tip of the Bull's right horn and the heel of the Charioteer's right foot.

It is for this reason that the Sign of the Twins stands for at-one-ment as an everlasting emblem etched upon the night sky of the reconciliation between the animal and god in Man — the lower and Higher Selves or minds. If you look at the illustration reproduced below you will see that Auriga carries the goat of Capella in the crook of his left arm.

auriga
Here we have a perfect picture — albeit concealed in plain sight — of the enigmatical 'living goat' referred to in Leviticus 16:10, which, on the day of At-One-Ment was sent away into the wilderness by Aaron. Note that we say At-One-Ment and not 'atonement' which carries quite a subtly different meaning, both in Jewish theology and in the common dictionary definition of making reparation for wrongdoing or the expiation of so-called 'sin'.

Nor does at-one-ment solely mean reconciliation between God and Man as the Christian Church teaches, although this follows naturally from the reconciliation between the two minds. But the latter must come first. There can be no peace with God when we are at war with ourselves.

The rich symbolism of the goat Capella carried by Auriga has several esoteric meanings. On the one hand it refers to the parable of the Prodigal Son which John Temple unveiled in the fifth of his articles on the Search for Truth, and on the other to the sacrifices made by the Higher Self in the work of regeneration which precedes the reconciliation between the earthly (Castor) and Heavenly (Pollux) Twins.

Some might find it strange that the 'Charioteer' is figured as man carrying a goat. Where is his chariot? One clue to its absence is the ancient Arabic name for Capella which was Al-Rakib, meaning "the driver." Another clue is found in Macedonian folklore in which the star was known as Jastreb ("the hawk"). Taking the two clues together we might posit that Capella was anciently figured as a shepherd driving his flock across the Heavens. The most likely candidate for such a flock is the nearby star cluster in Taurus called the Pleiades or Seven Sisters which we mentioned in the previous part of this investigation.

Although the origin of this ancient constellation is lost, Auriga has been represented for ages as a mighty man seated on the Milky Way. In both Egypt and Greece he was likened to a shepherd carrying a goat on his shoulder with a pair of little kids in his hand; the first magnitude star Capella marking the place of the heart of the imaginary goat.

In India, Capella was worshipped as the Heart of Brahma. The ancient Peruvians called it "Colca," and connected it with the affairs of shepherds. English poets have alluded to it as "the Shepherds' Star." These several allusions leave no doubt in our mind that the above explanation of the symbolism of Auriga and Capella is correct.

Not that this will convince those who cite Star Names: Their Lore and Meaning (1899), in which the author, R. H. Allen (1838-1908), tells us that Capella's place on the Zodiac of Dendera is occupied by a mummified cat in the outstretched hand of a male figure crowned with feathers! However, when we look at the map in question, the only such figure to be found is placed below the constellation of Leo, the Lion.

This is nowhere near the Twins who are pictured above and to the right of Leo, between the constellation of the Tortoise and the Bull. If the builders of the Dendera Zodiac were capable of locating these constellations in their correct positions in the firmament, why would they place Capella where we find it on the Egyptian planisphere?

cat goddess
Moreover, as we can see in the detail from the Dendera Zodiac shown above, the figure in question is holding two mummified cats in its outstretched arms, not one. The 'feathers' Allen saw in the crown of the seated figure might just as well be the spikes of a crown. Moreover, the long hair of the figure and its position immediately below the Lion of Leo, suggests that rather than a star, she (if she is feminine) may represent the ancient asterism known as Coma Berenices, meaning "Berenice's Hair" in Latin.

The Greek astronomers Eratosthenes and Ptolemy both included it as part of the constellation of Leo, as did the Arabs. Allen, on the other hand goes on to identify this figure with the god Ptah on the basis that his sanctuary in the Temple of Karnak was orientated to Capella.

This seems a very tenuous connection given that almost all the Egyptian temples were orientated to many stars at different times. Nor did or does Ptah have any connection with cats — dead or alive! That was the province of the goddess Bast. We would add that there are many figures depicted on the Zodiac of Dendera which have never been connected with a specific constellation or star and many more about which Egyptologists and astronomers disagree. The tenuous identification of a goddess holding mummified cats with the star Capella made by R. H. Allen being a case in point.

What is known about Egyptian astronomy is conjectural, confusing and contradictory, as we discussed in part seven of Spiritus Hermeticum when we examined the doctrine of the 36 Decans. Hence it is possible that the figure Allen misassociated with Capella was connected with one or more of the Decans of Leo; each of these was anciently thought to preside in turn over the beginning, middle and end of the month over which the Lion ruled.

Although we know there were 36 Decans in Egypt, and in some cases can translate their names, such as "in the centre of the boat," this does not help us to correlate them to modern constellations and star names, much less deduce the nature of the influence they exert. For these reasons, as well as others you can read about in the aforementioned article, we have taken the decision not to discuss the Decani in this investigation. Readers who are interested in pursuing the subject will find no shortage of information in books and on the Internet.

But we warn them that there is little or no consensus about these troublesome star groupings. Apart from the so-called 'modern' system based on triplicity, meaning those Zodiacal Signs which belong to the same element, i.e., Aries, Leo and Sagittarius (all Fire signs), we have the system of the Chaldean Decans, the system of the 1st century Roman astrologer Manilius, and the system of Ptolemy, none of which may bear much (if any) resemblance to the actual system(s) used by the ancient Egyptians. So, "you pays your money and takes your pick," as the saying has it, and may good fortune attend your studies of this branch of astrology.

The final extra-Zodiacal constellation to be examined in this Afterword is Monoceros or the Unicorn. This is a relatively modern constellation which made its first appearance on a celestial globe in the mid 17th century. Among the interesting features of this star group is Beta Monocerotis — a tertiary star system, the three members of which form a triangle. The astronomer William Herschel who discovered it in 1781 called it "one of the most beautiful sights in the heavens." Monoceros is bordered by Canis Minor to the north and Canis Major to the south, as you can see in the illustration below.

monoceros
But what principally interests us from an occult point of view is the association of this faint constellation with the mythical creature known as a unicorn. The earliest references to unicorns are found in early Mesopotamian artworks. It is also mentioned in the ancient myths of India and China, proving that this was a truly universal animal.

The Greek historian Ctesias, who flourished in the 5th century B.C., related that the Indian wild ass was the size of a horse, with a white body, purple head, and blue eyes, and on its forehead was a cubit-long horn coloured red at the pointed tip, black in the middle, and white at the base. Those who drank from its horn were thought to be protected from stomach trouble, epilepsy, and poison. It was very fleet of foot and difficult to capture.

One of the reasons why the horns of supposed unicorns fetched such high prices in antiquity was that it was believed that they possessed the valuable healing properties Ctesias mentions. Whether the actual animal ever existed is doubtful, though on the other hand, there is no evidence it didn't. The Hebrew word Reem which is mentioned at least nine times in the Old Testament has been translated as 'unicorn' by Biblical scholars, although secular authorities believe that some species of wild ox is intended.

Herodotus refers to it as the 'horned ass' while Caesar tells of its existence within the bounds of the great Hercynian Forest. One writer mentions an Ethiopian unicorn, of ash colour, resembling a two–year old colt with the head of a goat with a white horn with yellow streaks.

If we regard the unicorn as an emblem, symbolising certain esoteric qualities and principles, rather than an actual animal that may once have roamed the earth, Ctesias' description may not be so improbable after all. The colour white has been associated with purity and goodness since ancient times in all parts of the world, while purple is the colour of royalty. The multicoloured horn has several possible meanings which we don't have the time or space to explore in this Afterword.

It is very common in ancient artworks to see the lion accompany the unicorn. They often face one another, and are supposed to be always combatant. We may take this as an allegory of the eternal strife between the spiritual Bull of the Higher Mind and the material Bull of the lower. What is more important still in these ancient pictures, the Tree of Life often stands between the two animals, suggestive of the Divine Soul that watches over both minds. This lends credence to Ctesias' description of the remarkable healing properties of unicorn horns, for the Higher Mind can and does 'heal' the lower, as some of our readers can testify.

If we seem to have dwelt disproportionally upon the two minds and their mutuality in this part of our investigation it is because the Sign of the TWINS is the first of the constellations in which this mystery is most clearly depicted. A mystery that, as we pointed out in part three, was known only to a few Initiates until Madame Blavatsky revealed it in the late 19th century.

As we said then, it is this duality in us all which furnishes the master key to the secrets of creation and the origin of good and evil. A host of psycho-physiological problems such as mental illness, autism, genius and imbecility, remain inexplicable without this vital insight into the occult nature of Man. It is quite impossible to grasp the manifold meanings concealed within the symbolical figurations of the Testament of the Zodiac without this key. A key moreover, which is triple, not dual, for we must not lose sight of the fact that Man has a Divine Soul too.

Hence any mystery, question or problem that the Tapestry of the Starry Vault presents to us can only be fully explored and explained through the use of this triple key. For all things and beings which arise from their archetypes Above display their physico-material, mental-intellectual and purely spiritual attributes here below.

Those who lack this key, or disbelieve in it, will see nothing more than the exterior of our Tapestry. If they have a scientific bent they will most likely airily dismiss what we say about astronomical symbolism as mystical clap-trap, while those wedded to the dogmas of psychological astrology will search in vain for hints and tips to explain what makes people 'tick'.

We apologise to all such readers and recommend they read no further, for to paraphrase one of the many comic lines spoken by the antihero in the British TV series Blackadder II, "nothing of interest lies therein" — for them!

asterisks
In our next afterword we shall tell you about the extra-Zodiacal constellations of Argo Navis and Eridanus. Meanwhile, we hope that you have enjoyed the fourth of our explorations of the hidden messages of the Stars.
